SYLLABUS  
Fall Semester 2023. San Francisco State University  
Instructor:  




Course description. The anatomy of the human body will be studied with an  emphasis on how structure relates to function of each of the organ systems.  Online resources and anatomical models will be used to help visualize form and function  relationships. There will be two sessions with human cadavers. If you have any concerns  about the cadaver assignments please be sure to discuss them and to ask for a private  discussion if you wish.  
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES:  
By the end of the class you should have achieved the following knowledge,  understanding and skills:  
Knowledge:  
a) Identify the structure, cell and tissue components and functions of the organ systems of the human body. 
b) Understand how the organ systems are structurally and functionally inter-related. c) Learn and use the technical terminology and language associated with anatomy. d) Recognize human structures on diagrams and cadavers. 
Skills: 
a) Use online resources as a “virtual laboratory”, to investigate anatomical and histological structures. 
b) Learn to interpret anatomical and histological sections and preparations. Relate the surfaces of sectioned material to the three-dimensional structures from which they were derived. 
c) Read and interpret current research literature describing the structure and function of human organ systems and understand some examples of how structure is altered in disease. 
d) Learn how to apply your knowledge of the human body to your own self-care and to help others around you understand their own bodies. 
e) Learn how to communicate your knowledge of anatomy verbally and in writing using both scientific and lay language. The course will be conducted in English and a knowledge of English grammar and spelling is required.
1 
PREREQUISITES:  
Students must have satisfactorily completed SFSU _____and _____or ______and  _____or an equivalent college laboratory course in a biological science with a grade of  “C” or better, and have a contemporary understanding of cell and tissue structure &  function. _______or _________are also acceptable. Equivalent _______lecture and lab  courses from other colleges are acceptable but if your grades are not yet on your SFSU  transcript, please email a transcript to me showing completion of the relevant courses.  
CLASS WEBSITE:  
Access to a reliable computer and internet connection is a requirement for the class. Class  materials including a copy of the syllabus, lecture materials, class assignments study  guides and grades will be provided on CANVAS  
You are responsible for checking CANVAS on a regular basis. If you miss a deadline, you  miss the points for that assignment. No exceptions.  
Since this is an electronically supported course, you must have easy access to a computer  and the internet in order to be successful. There are many computer resources on  campus. If your home computer on internet access is not reliable you  must allow time to complete assignments on campus. Insufficient computer or internet  resources will not be accepted as a reason for late work. A list of computer labs on  campus can be found at: http://www.sfsu.edu/%7Edoit/labs.htm  
TEACHING METHODS, VIRTUAL LABORATORY AND CADAVER LABS:  
You will be guided to online resources for independent study and assigned activities. In  exams and other graded assignments, you will be required to identify structures from  images similar to those you have seen online or in your textbook. In addition, there will  be two cadaver labs. In these labs, you will observe anatomical structures on cadavers but  you will not be performing dissections.  
In class, we will use preserved animal organs sealed in plastic. These bags must never be  opened. We will also use plastic and human bones to study the skeleton and other models.  We will perform a number of other group activities to reinforce concepts and learning.  
There will be special safety instructions for each class that uses models or specimens and  for the cadaver labs. There is an online form that you must read, sign electronically and  submit on Canvas to confirm that you will follow all class instructions. This includes no  eating and drinking in the class room.  
CLASS ATTENDANCE  
Classes will involve viewing models and a number of in class activities which will support  your learning. Attendance is expected in all classes 
2 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1) Open Stax Anatomy and Physiology 
This is a free downloadable textbook: 
https://openstax.org/details/books/anatomy-and-physiology 
If you would like a hard copy you may purchase one for a reasonable price at the same  website. 
2) Kaplan Medical Anatomy Coloring Book Any Edition. 
This may be purchased from Amazon (approximately $22) or other sources of your choice but  you need a new copy as we will be completing some of the exercises. 
3) Obtain colored pencils and a notebook - drawings are 
best in a white unlined book. 
Please bring some colored pencils or pens for anatomical diagrams. Colored diagrams with labels are much easier to remember! I recommend an unlined notebook for diagrams. Have these with you at all times. 
OPTIONAL BOOKS AND RESOURCES: There are a number of excellent visual guides and coloring books to study anatomy. None of these are required but you may find a coloring book useful. In addition, there are a number of excellent anatomy books in the SFSU Library Reserve Room. 
In the media access center, you will find a skull and a variety of other disarticulated bones. A model heart, brain and kidney are available for study. These items may not be removed from the library, but are available for your hands-on review. 
NAME TENTS: You will make a desktop name tent near the beginning of the course. At the end of each class, please initial by the date and write a comment about what you need to do before the next class. You must bring your name tent with you to every class and place on the table in front of you. There will be points at the end of the semester for a well maintained name tent. 
EXAMS AND GRADING 
There will be a safety and class contract that needs to be filled in and submitted on CANVAS by the beginning of the second class (20 points). There will be ten online multiple choice quizzes worth 15 points each. for these assignments you are allowed three  attempts and only your best score will be recorded. There will be 3 midterms (100 points each), one final (150 points). Midterms will be multiple choice, the final will have a multiple choice and written component. There will be 50 points for full participation in the poster assignment. For the cadaver labs, you must attend and you will complete a worksheet or written assignment (15 points each lab, 30 points total). 
3 
By the end of the class you will have practiced verbal and written skills. You will have  interacted extensively with peers in class discussions and group assignments such as the  posters and you will have practiced your presentation skills. 
Total possible points = 700. There may be extra credit available. 
Please note: If you miss an assignment in class or miss the deadline for an assignment you miss the points unless you notify me about difficult circumstances in a timely way. 
All midterms will be a multiple choice. The final will also include essay questions which will  be provided in advance so that you can review appropriate material. Spelling counts! If you  spell words accurately this enables you to pronounce them accurately and vice versa! 

Missed exams and assignments: 
It is expected that all exams and quizzes are taken at the assigned time. As stated earlier, you are expected to have adequate computer resources or to use campus resources. Computer glitches will not be accepted as a reason for late work. If you need to miss an exam for medical or other emergencies, written proof (e.g. doctors note) will be required. An emergency exception will only be made for one exam. A make up exam may consist of an alternative assignment, possibly including essay questions. 
CELL PHONES, COMPUTERS AND TABLETS 
Cell phones should be turned off at the beginning of class unless you are using them to follow slides or do class work. Electronic devices may be used for class related activities but anyone texting, emailing or performing other tasks, unrelated to the class, will be asked to leave. It is not only a distraction to you but a distraction to the people around you. 
In exams, you will sit in an assigned seat and have your cell phone turned off and in your backpack. 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY: Cheating and plagiarism will not be tolerated. Any form of academic dishonesty will be reported to the Office of Student Conduct. Dishonesty includes copying work from other students, using electronic devices, bringing anything
4 
unauthorized into exams. 

DATES AND DEADLINES 
If you need to drop or withdraw, you are responsible for taking action. If you stop coming to class or exams for any reason and do not discuss it with me in person or by email, and you remain on the roster, you will receive an F or WU grade. 
KEYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS 
1) Make a commitment to the class immediately. Think about why you are taking this class and what you want from it. Attend all classes. We do many useful activities in class. 
2) Be sure to prepare for classes before you come. Review material in PowerPoint presentations and in the textbook. 
3) Remember that learning is a very active process. Everything you do in class and independently should be active. Do not passively sit and flick through/read the book and lecture notes. Draw diagrams and flowcharts. Ask yourself questions. Look up and write out the answers to your questions. Make flash cards. Join a study group. 
4) I put study guides and lecture summaries on Canvas. Use these. They are designed to help you focus on material that will be on the exams. 
5) Make sure you meet deadlines. Late work loses points and indicates that you are not keeping up with the material you need for exams. 
6) Think about how your knowledge of anatomy is going to be important in understanding your own health, the health and wellbeing of your friends and family and for success in your future life and career 
ENJOY THE CLASS. REMEMBER THAT I AM HERE TO HELP  YOU.COMMUNICATE WITH ME AND ASK FOR THE HELP YOU NEED.




7